THE TALE OF THE STAIRS (Hristo Smirnenski)
 
"Who are you?" The Devil asked him.
"I am a plebeian by birth and all ragged folk are my brothers. How terrible the world is, how wretched the people are!"
It was a young man who spoke with head erect and clenched fists. He stood at the foot of the Stairs - a high white staircase of rose-flecked marble. He gazed fixedly into the distance where the grey crowds of poverty stirred like the turbid waters of a swollen river. The crowds surged and seethed, raised a forest of thin black arms, thunderous cries of wrath and indignation rent the air and the echo faded slowly and solemnly like distant gun-fire. The crowds grew and grew nearer in clouds of yellow dust, single silhouettes showed more distinctly against the grey horizon. An old man approached, bent low to the ground as if seeking lost youth. A barefoot little girl clutched his ragged clothes and stared at the high Stairs with mild cornflower-blue eyes. Stared and smiled. Then thin grey figures came all in rags, singing a long-drawn funeral chorus. Someone whistled shrilly, somebody else thrusting his hands in his pockets laughed loud and harshly and insanity blazed in his eyes.
"I am a plebeian by birth and all ragged folk are my brothers. How terrible the world is, how wretched the people are! But you there, you at the top there..."
It was a young man who spoke with head erect and fists clenched in manace.
"So you hate those up at the top," the Devil asked, and styly leaned forward towards the young man.
"I shall have my revenge on those nobles and princes. I shall cruelly avenge my brothers - my brothers whose faces are as yellow as sand and who groan more bitterly than the blizzards of December. See their naked bleeding bodies, hear their groans! I shall avenge them. Let me go!"
The Devil smiled: "I am the guardian of those at the top and without a bribe I shall not betray them."
"I have no gold. I have nothing with which to bribe you... I am poor, a youth in rags... But I am willing to give up my life..."
...

Dedicated to all who will say: "It was nothing to do with me!"